From the New York Times, I'm Michael
Bubaro. [music] This is the Daily.
A few days ago, when President Trump
proposed the introduction of a 50-year
mortgage, he challenged a [music]
bedrock of the American housing market
and financial system. But above all, he
revealed just how desperate [music] he
is to lower prices for consumers and how
willing he is to embrace radical
solutions to do so.
It's [music] Monday, November 17th.
Democrats had a clean sweep around the
country on Tuesday. It was a resounding
demand for relief from the rising cost
of living in an off-year election.
[music]
>> In the final analysis, the message from
the elections two weeks ago in New
Jersey, Virginia, and New York was
exceptionally clear. The country is
unaffordable.
>> People's groceries bills are still high.
They're still dealing with inflation.
They're suffering. Focus on domestic
policy and on making people's lives
better.
>> Everyone embraced that message.
except
>> our energy costs are way down, our
groceries are way down, everything is
way down
>> for President Trump.
>> So, uh, I don't want to hear about the
affordability because right now
>> who initially dismissed it, much to the
constrnation of his fellow Republicans,
>> the president says there's virtually no
inflation and that grocery prices are
going down. Do you agree with him on
that?
>> Um, no. I go to the grocery store
myself. Grocery prices remain high.
Energy prices are high. So affordability
is a problem.
>> Who said that they agreed with the
American people that the president had
not done enough to bring down prices.
[music]
So after a few days of denial, Trump
abruptly changed his tune. Suddenly he
was Mr. Affordability. President Trump
accusing four of the biggest meat
packing companies of driving up US beef
prices, which
>> he ordered the Justice Department to
investigate whether meatacking companies
have conspired to inflate meat prices.
>> The president now looking into it. You
could say he has beef with this
particular industry here. He lifted his
own tariffs on household products like
coffee, tomatoes, [music] and bananas
and floated the idea of giving every
American a $2,000 check based on the
revenues from his tariff.
>> I want the money to go directly to you,
the people.
>> He suggested lowering health care costs
by sending consumers a direct [music]
federal subsidy. and you go out and
you'll buy your own health insurance and
you'll negotiate different plans and
you'll get much better insurance and you
will be an entrepreneur for yourself.
And finally, [music]
he offered a potentially game-changing
and extremely controversial idea for
reducing [music] the price of housing.
And he announced this idea in a [music]
pretty unusual way, even for Trump.
So, Saturday morning, Trump posts this
picture on Truth Social. It's just a
picture and it says, "Great American
presidents."
>> Connor Dohy is a housing reporter for
the Times.
>> And on the left you have Franklin D.
Roosevelt and above him it says 30-year
mortgage. And on the right you have
President Donald Trump and above him it
says 50-year mortgage.
>> And when you saw that, Connor, did you
know what that meant? [clears throat]
>> Yeah. Right off the bat, you see he's
trying to come up with an idea that will
lower mortgage payments for everyone who
has a mortgage,
>> right? Address affordability by making
housing more affordable.
>> Yes. Making payments more affordable.
>> Right. And quite importantly, this image
puts him in the pantheon of great
presidents who radically rearrange the
US housing market. And to use that image
maybe as our road map here, let's talk
about the left side image, FDR and the
30-year mortgage, which is the starting
point for Trump and I suspect for this
conversation. So, I suppose what we
should probably do is go to a little bit
before FDR and say what the housing
market used to be like. Okay, many fewer
Americans owned their homes and they had
a lot of different ways for borrowing
the money to buy a home. Now, one of the
most popular models was something called
building and loan associations. Some of
your older or film buff listeners might
know that during the movie It's a
Wonderful Life, there's a fictional
company called the Bailey Brothers
Building and Loan. So, basically,
they're co-ops. a bunch of people buy
into like what is essentially a pool of
money and then they can borrow from that
pool of money their shareholders in this
pool and then they that allows them to
borrow money from it. It's a very
complicated model. It had a lot of risk
to it.
>> But the point is is that it's a very
haphazard market and it's a market that
the government has essentially no
involvement in. Right? So during the
great depression obviously there's total
chaos. There's a huge run on banks.
Credit is just completely pulled back in
various ways and it makes it really
really hard to buy a house. FDR is seen
as the person who brought the government
into the housing market in a big way.
After the Great Depression, government
does a bunch of different things. One is
they really try to make standard this
idea of what's called an amortizable
mortgage, which means you have one
payment and you do your principal and
interest in one easy payment. The other
thing is they start encouraging
longerterm mortgages. Now, longerterm
mortgages are going to be more
affordable because the monthly payment
is going to be much less if you can
extend it over, say, 30 years instead of
10 years. The problem is banks don't
really want to do long mortgages. They
don't like it because if interest rates
go up, they have to pay more money to
the people who put money in their bank,
but they're still getting the same
amount of money from the people who've
borrowed money for the home. So, the
government says, "Okay, well, we'll help
you with that problem by covering you if
these loans start to go belly up." Mhm.
>> Now, exactly how they do this is this
very, very complicated mortgage system
that we now have. But the whole point of
all of this is to make it easier for
more people to buy homes and for that
home to be sort of wrapped around one
easy payment. So out of the economic
calamity that was the Great Depression
comes this effort by the government to
encourage as many Americans as possible
to buy a home by ensuring that they can
do so over a very long period that makes
it more affordable with what we now
think of as the fixed rate 30-year
mortgage. Interestingly, we can thank
the Great Depression in a sense for
that. Yeah, that system is why we have a
huge home ownership rate. About
twothirds of Americans own their home.
That number would be way lower without
their 30-year fixed mortgage. And it's
just an incredible deal
>> because the interest rate is fixed, your
monthly loan payment is frozen, even if
inflation picks up. On top of that, if
rates go way down, you can refinance,
>> right?
>> So, you can actually lower your rate
over time, which I did not too long ago.
So you get all the benefits of a fixed
rate with none of the downsides. And
that is why we have a really high home
ownership rate. Now let's talk for a
second. Why would the government want to
make it easier for people to borrow
money? Well, the reason is if you're
borrowing money to buy an asset, a home,
something that's going to hold its
value, hopefully increase in value,
that's kind of different than running up
a credit card bill to get takeout one
night, right? So the government has all
this financial plumbing created because
it wants people to buy a stable asset.
It's stable for their family. It has
forced savings.
>> Even if the home doesn't appreciate or
appreciates not very well, you're still
saving all that money, which you would
not be doing if you were just renting.
So you're borrowing all this money to
kind of create stability. You create
people who are rooted in neighborhoods.
to create an asset that people can own
and pass to their children. You create a
form of retirement savings.
>> So, why would we ever mess with the
30-year fixed rate mortgage if from what
you're saying, it kind of works and
works pretty well?
>> Yeah, homes have become much more
expensive. There are a lot of
complicated reasons for why they become
more expensive, but the way that people
see it is that mortgage payment. M
>> there's an adage in the real estate
industry that says you don't actually
buy a house, you buy a payment. People
use that payment as their barometer for
can they or can they not achieve the
dream of becoming a homeowner.
>> So this payment has gotten a lot more
expensive over the past couple years for
a whole bunch of different reasons. One
is homes just cost more. So if homes
cost more, it's going to be a higher
payment. The other is interest rates
have gone up,
>> right? quite a bit from their rock
bottom level in the pandemic. And that
is making people feel really bad because
all their friends got 2% interest rates
and now they're stuck with six. So homes
are more expensive and money is more
expensive and so that payment has gone
up quite a bit from what it was.
>> Right. The 30-year fixed rate mortgage
no longer feels very affordable.
>> Yes. And so if you're a politician
though and you're just looking at that
payment, you're going, "Everyone is mad
about this payment, what can I do in a
relatively short period of time that
will make that payment go down, which
would make people feel very good."
>> Mhm.
>> Well, you can do what FDR did,
[laughter] which is find ways to stretch
the payment out over a much longer
period of time.
>> Thus, the idea of a 50-year mortgage.
Yes. So, Bill Py, who is a senior Trump
administration official, also happens to
be the grandson of William Py, who is
helped build the PY Homes homebuilding
empire.
>> Wow.
>> Apparently goes to Trump and shows him
this poster, FDR on the left, 30-year
mortgage. Trump on the right, 50-year
mortgage, and Trump buys into the idea,
I guess, and post it on Truth Social and
seemingly embraces it as a proposal. and
just explain how a 50-year mortgage
would work to actually lower people's
monthly housing costs.
>> So, we're taking some guesses here
because the Trump administration did not
put out a thorough white paper on this,
but the basic gist is the cost of the
home would be spread out over 50 years
instead of 30 years. So, if you are
buying a $500,000 home, for instance,
you're paying that purchase price over
50 years instead of 30 years. And so the
portion of your payment that is the home
is going to be lower in each monthly
payment. So let's just say you're buying
a $500,000 house at current mortgage
rates and you put down 20%. Your payment
would go from about $2,500 for a
30-year, right? To about $2,200
for a 50-year
>> per month. Per month. So you'd save
about $300 per month. And just to say
$300 a month times 12 months in a year
is nearly $4,000 a year. That's real
money.
>> Yeah, definitely. That's real money,
babe. Imagine if you got a $4,000 raise.
>> Yeah, you'd be pretty pleased. And so in
theory, what would a 50-year mortgage do
to the US market if it came into
existence and if it lowered home monthly
payments by the amount we're talking
about? It's hard to say exactly how it
would impact the market, but it would
turn up the heat. It would make more
people want to buy. It would make more
people feel like they could buy.
>> That in turn might get more people want
to list because they feel like, "Oh,
well, I'm going to finally get the offer
I really wanted."
>> That in turn could get home builders to
increase the pace of new construction
because the lines are growing again. So
it would definitely stimulate the
housing market in a great many ways
because more people can buy homes now,
>> right? So you can see why this would be
an attractive option for the president
of the United States at a moment when
everyone's telling him there's a real
affordability problem in this country
and it's typified by the unaffordability
of the housing markets. You can see why
it would be tempting to post that image
and just make a 30-year mortgage
suddenly a 50-year mortgage.
>> Oh, totally. I mean, if you're a
president who wants to do anything for
affordability, coming up with a thing
that will change someone's monthly bill
is really appealing because it would
lower payments and it would lower them
in an obvious way that people could see
in their budget. And so what is the
response to this idea once Trump posts
it? That image of himself and FDR and
the concept of 50-year mortgage.
People just annihilate this idea. I
mean, they say this could make things
worse, not better. People from all
across the political spectrum converge
and say this is just an incredibly bad
idea.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
So, Connor, why is everyone panning this
idea? What is so wrong with the 50-year
mortgage?
>> Okay, so the problem is it looks like it
saves you money. Let's return to our
example. You have the $500,000 house
with the current 6.2% mortgage rate. you
go from $2,500 to $2,200, you've saved
yourself 300 bucks,
>> right?
>> Okay. Now, in the first example, 30
years, you're going to end up paying
about $500,000 in interest. You pay
basically the house in interest. Buy
$500,000 house, you pay about 500,000
interest. A lot of interest. Yeah. Okay.
Now, let's go to the second example. You
take that house and you buy it over 50
years. Well, now you're going to end up
spending about $900,000 in interest.
>> Wow.
>> A significant amount more. So, almost a
million dollars in interest for your
$500,000 house.
>> Wow. You're paying way more in interest
than you are for your house. You're
basically buying your house twice, but
you're paying the bank for a whole other
version of your house.
>> Exactly. I mean, and the reason is it's
20 more years of paying interest. So, a
major major downside of a 50-year
mortgage is 20 extra years of forking
over interest payments to the bank. And
not only that, there's some questions
about whether or not it would even
really save you money. So, for instance,
if banks are going to be doing 50-year
mortgages, the interest rate on the
50-year mortgage is almost certainly
going to be higher than on a 30-year
mortgage. And the reason is a 50-year
mortgage is much riskier. If you're
lending someone money over 50 years
instead of 30 years, there's a much
higher chance that something will go
wrong in those 50 years.
>> Mhm.
>> On top of that, if you are buying that
home after 50 years, takes you a lot
longer to start owning real equity in
that home. As anybody knows, looking at
their uh mortgage statement, in the
first few years, you're you're mainly
only paying interest and in the last
years you're mainly only paying
principal. So, it would take you 20
years to start really having significant
equity in the house,
>> right? And I guess we should probably
mention the reality that if a lot of
Americans started to take out 50-year
mortgages,
and we assume many people don't start
taking them out until they're in their
late 30s and early 40s, which is when a
lot of Americans now embark on home
ownership, a lot of people are not going
to make it to the end of these
mortgages. I mean, they're going to die,
right?
>> Unquestionably. Now, what's really
striking about the critiques of this
idea is just how much of it is coming
from within Trump's party and some of
Trump's closest allies. You have Laura
Loomer, the conservative activist,
saying lifetime mortgages. You have
Marjgerie Taylor Green, who is one of
the most strongly associated with
America first. Well, she says you'll be
in debt for life. You have Christopher
Rufo, another conservative activist,
saying if you have a 15 or 30-year
mortgage, you'll actually own your home,
whereas a 50-year mortgage, you're never
going to own your home. Essentially,
you're just renting it from the bank.
Now,
>> interesting.
>> Many people from all across the
political spectrum sort of recognize
this as a very risky deal.
>> So, is it fair to say that this is
probably not about to become the new
gold standard of American mortgages?
>> I think it's fair to say they're going
back to the drawing board on this one.
So if this idea isn't really going
anywhere at the moment, what else is
coming out of this administration that
would potentially confront the
unaffordability of housing right now?
>> So Bill Py, the Trump administration
official, said this was just one of
several ideas. Another would be portable
mortgages where you could take your
mortgage rate with you to another house.
That would hopefully open up inventory
because a lot of Americans right now
have lower mortgage rates and want to
move but aren't going to because they
don't want to have to buy a new house at
a higher mortgage rate. So that might
encourage more people to move. So it
would unstick the housing market
potentially.
>> Another one would be assumable
mortgages. So that's kind of the same
idea from a different direction. If you
buy a home and the person who owns the
home has a killer low interest rate, you
might be able to assume their mortgage
and their mortgage rate, you know, when
you buy the house. So, that would
encourage someone to move, that would
encourage someone to buy, etc.
>> Are any of these practical? Are they
achievable?
>> Uh, probably not. Um, what you're seeing
though is all the same type of idea,
which is how do we fiddle with the debt?
How do we fiddle with mortgage rates in
such a way that we can attack the
payments either by extending it with the
fifth year or essentially winding back
in time to give people access to
mortgage rates that reflect mortgage
rates of 10 years ago.
>> Mhm.
>> But there's one big thing we're missing
here, which is that the reason housing
is so expensive is that we have a really
bad housing shortage in the country. We
stopped building housing essentially
stopped building housing after the great
recession and have never caught up. So
if you want to have any real impact on
affordability, you have to eventually
attack that problem. And attacking the
mortgage rate stuff, all it really does
is make it easier for more people to buy
what is basically the same number of
homes.
>> Right. It attacks a symptom by
definition.
>> Exactly. And the problem with the
housing shortage is that it's takes a
long time to have any impact on and it's
not a thing that the president has a lot
of control over. There are state
regulations for how you build housing.
There are local regulations for how you
build a housing. All this stuff that
just breaks your brain. The white house
doesn't have much control or even
influence over.
>> Right. That's the province of governors.
It's the province of mayors.
>> Yeah. So around the country you are
seeing states really go after this
supply problem. You've seen Florida,
Montana, Texas, California, Oregon,
Arizona, Massachusetts. All of these
states have had some kind of effort to
essentially lower their housing
regulations to make it easier to build
housing in hopes that they will inspire
home builders to go through a building
boom. But these solutions all take a
really long time and they can also be
controversial,
>> right?
>> You know, in California, for instance,
they just passed a law that changes
zoning. It makes it much easier to build
higher density housing in existing
neighborhoods. Well, the legislature who
passed that bill has been working on a
version of this for 10 years, and it
only passed after people fought like
crazy against it because they don't want
taller buildings in their single family
neighborhoods. Even if all these things
happen after going through all that
difficult politics, it'll still be years
before developers get projects approved,
before they start building them, before
there's enough units to impact the
supply that people would really notice
in prices. So this work is just grinding
hard work that's also kind of thankless
and it feels like the states have kind
of run out of options and so they are
doing the hard work. So let's say all
these states, California, whatever,
Texas, actually have a huge impact on
the supply and actually they lower
prices for people, right? Let's say it's
a resounding success. That resounding
success is unlikely to happen in
anyone's political lifetime.
>> It's certainly not going to happen
before the 2026 midterms and it's very
unlikely to have a huge huge noticeable
impact on prices by 2028.
>> Got it. From everything you're saying,
the real solutions to the American
housing crisis of unaffordability right
now isn't flashy. It isn't quick. It's
not a true social post with two
presidents on it. It's not a 50-year
mortgage. It's this very unsexy,
difficult, slow, brainbreaking work of
changing the way zoning works and
stimulating local housing markets. And
it's probably not going to be coming
from the White House.
>> Absolutely right. [music]
I think the federal government can be a
huge part of this story. I think there
are lots of things the federal
government can do to help these efforts
that are happening in state and local
governments,
but they're not going to be the author
of them.
[music]
>> Well, Connor, thank you very much. I
appreciate it.
Thank you.
[music]
We'll be right back. [music]
Here's what else you need to [music]
know.
One of the Republican party's most
high-profile alliances between President
Trump and Representative Marjgerie
Taylor Green of Georgia officially
imploded over the weekend. Green,
[music] a once fierce Trump advocate,
who backed his efforts to overturn the
2020 election results, has infuriated
Trump [music] recently by criticizing
his handling of the economy and the
Jeffrey Epstein investigation. As a
[music] result, Trump withdrew his
support for Green, called her a traitor,
and accused her of becoming a Republican
[music]
in name only.
>> What do you think happened? What do you
think is the reason for this?
Unfortunately, it has all come down to
the Epstein files and that is shocking.
And [music] you know, I I stand with
these women. I stand with rape victims
and I I will not apologize for that. In
an interview on Sunday with CNN, Green
said that she still supports Trump, but
expressed [music] alarm at the ferocity
of his attacks on her over the past few
days.
>> The most hurtful thing he [music] said,
which is absolutely untrue, is he called
me a traitor. And [music] that is that
is so extremely wrong. And those are the
types of words used that can radicalize
people against me and [music] put my
life in danger.
Meanwhile, on Sunday night, President
Trump [music] ended his effort to stop
House Republicans, including
Representative Green, from backing a
[music] bill that would force the
administration to release all of its
files on Epstein. Trump had [music]
previously fought the measure. The bill
is expected to pass later this week. And
so by endorsing it now, Trump hopes to
avoid a potentially major embarrassment.
[music]
Today's episode was produced by Nina
Feldman, Mary Wilson, Ricky Netsky, and
Jessica [music] Chung. It was edited by
Patricia Willins and Michael Benois.
contains music by [music] Dan Powell,
Marian Lozano, and Diane Wong, and was
engineered by Alyssa Moxley. [music]
[music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Michael
Boro.
See you tomorrow.